# SwingPlus

Objectively Grading the Baseball Swing


Abstract:
In my capstone, I analyzed the baseball swing of elite baseball players using objective measurements. Specifically, I wanted to find how changes in two variables, bat speed and attack angle changed the quality of contact to maximize batted ball outcomes. To do this I used opensource data from Driveline Baseball’s OpenBiomechanics dataset to predict batted ball outcomes (measured by xwOBAcon) with characteristics of each swing. The data was gathered, cleaned and processed by Driveline Baseball, a leader in the field of baseball research and biomechanics. I used the statistic xwOBAcon to assess the value of a batted ball, calculating it based on Exit Speed and Launch angle of the baseball. I then used a RandomForest model trained on 7 metrics describing bat path as measured by a Blast bat tracking device and Computer Vision to model xwOBAcon. This model was used to predict the values of xwOBAcon of 70% of the data and the other 30% was used to analyze the accuracy of the model. I found that my model was able to accurately predict the value of a batted ball depending on the change in one variable, specifically bat speed and attack angle. Based on my model, an increase in bat speed positively correlates with an increase in expected performance and the ideal attack angle for hitters usually sits around 8 degrees but differs depending on changes in the other swing characteristics.


Introduction:
Baseball, a multi-billion-dollar industry, has evolved significantly since the late 1800s. Back then, fans kept score and statistics for each game. Over the years, new statistics have emerged to help assign value to actions on the field. For instance, the win/loss (W/L) stat, which is now considered outdated, used to assign much of the game’s result value to a pitcher on each team. Other stats like Run Batted IN (RBI), Hits (H), and Walk (BB) helped various groups - fans, announcers, TV broadcasters, and front offices - judge the value of each player. These statistics have driven free agent contracts, which are now measured by the millions of dollars each player earns each year. As baseball has modernized, influential figures like Billy Bean and Bill James, along with unknown interns, have shaped the future of historic franchises like never before. They’ve brought about changes in the game, from shifting defensive players to convert more outs, to introducing nastier pitches with new names like ‘sweeper’. These progressions have brought new adaptations and changes to the game. However, one thing remains clear in the age of collecting biomechanical and ball flight data - hitters have been left behind (Salorio, 2023). Bat tracking data will become public on Baseball Savant in May of 2024 and presumably has been provided to teams starting recently and are working to utilize it as best as possible (Petriello, 2022). This is where my capstone project comes in, aiming to push forward the boundaries of public knowledge and better train young hitters to perform at the highest level.


Methods:
The biggest prize in each baseball game is a run. Runs determine the outcome of the game and scoring runs lead to job security, money, fame, and the happiness that comes with lifting up the Commissioners Trophy at the end of the World Series or winning the award for Most Valuable Player. Research since the implementation of ball tracking data confirms the hypothesis that a ball hit hard and in the air is the most valuable outcome for a hitter. The potential for multiple runs with one swing in the form of a home run, triple, or double almost always outweighs the risks that come along with that goal. Much has been built up to evaluate the performance of hitters, how hard they hit the ball, and the angle at which the ball leaves the bat. Recently, researchers have turned to a harder question, determining what measures of a swing can predict these results. Bat speed has long been common sense. The basic equation force equals mass times acceleration (F=ma) explains a lot. The faster a bat is moving when making contact with the ball, the faster the ball will fly. How much does this matter? What other measures correlate with success? These are questions I seek to answer, at least in part, with my project, knowing that the smallest improvements can be incredibly valuable in a professional baseball organization or to individual hitters.

The dataset with which I powered my project came from a place that I am very familiar with. “Driveline Baseball is the premier data-driven baseball player development organization in the world” (Driveline, 2024). I trained in this ‘baseball gym’ and research facility, chasing the dream of collegiate and professional baseball and they provided me with incredibly insightful and actionable data to help advance my career. As leaders in the baseball research industry, Driveline R&D has also provided open sourced biomechanical, ball, and bat tracking data to help push forward knowledge in the public spaces of baseball fanatics. Their data is divided into two sets, one pitching, and one hitting, of which we will be focusing on the hitting side. They provide cleaned and organized data for tens of hitters, each with multiple swings and metrics on ball flight, each paired with data tracking points on each hitter’s body and bat. Utilizing this incredible dataset, I was able to determine exactly what metrics I wanted to use to build my model.

The first step of the modelling stage of my project was to determine what I wanted to model and prepare my data. What has signal and can be calculated easily? “Most of the knowledge and much of the genius of the research worker lie behind his selection of what is worth observing” (Gregg, 1941). Expected statistics are a new form of evaluation discussed earlier, based on ball flight, how well we would expect a hitter to perform with a completely normal (bell-shaped) distribution of pitching, defense, stadiums, etc. and one statistic, expected weighted on-base average on contact (xwOBAcon), was perfect for this dataset. The most basic form of the stat is determined solely based on the exit speed and the vertical angle of the baseball when it leaves the bat. This is largely very stable and very predictive of player performance (Sharpe, 2019). The xwOBAcon of a hitter explains over 68% of the same stat the next year, confirming predictive power of the stat. Because I have ball flight data for each swing, this statistic is perfect to compare the effectiveness of each swing against each other. To assign an xwOBAcon value to each hit I used a file available via Mason McRae (2023) that matches each launch angle and exit velocity with its average xwOBAcon. To model the output, I decided to focus on easy-to-collect metrics that either describe the position of the body and bat right before the start of the swing or the movement of the bat through impact. The two that are the focus in my research are Bat Speed, the linear speed of the point 6 inches from the end of the bat, and Attack Angle, or the angle relative to the ground that the bat is travelling at impact. These metrics were collected through a Blast bat knob sensor, a relatively inexpensive piece of equipment that most coaches and players would have access to. After deciding on the variables and methods I would use, I wanted to scale my results. Another baseball-language that is familiar around people who live an breath baseball is the 20-80 scouting scale. It sounds complicated but from a statistical perspective 50 is an average MLB player and every 10 points is one standard deviation from the mean, up or down. So, to fit xwOBAcon to this scale I used the ‘scales’ library to set the mean to be 50 and each standard deviation would be 10, this helped so that all of these predictive values would be on a scale that baseball people and statistics people could understand. All of my variables has some correlation to the xwOBAcon values calculated with each swing. Modelling xwOBAcon using quantitative characteristics of the swing gave me a goal and a path forward to provide actual value to real hitters.

In my coursework at George Mason University and studying public baseball research I had become intimately familiar with the RandomForest modelling techniques and wanted to use this, along with cross validation, for my modelling. I also felt that this would give my research the greatest potential of being accepted by the general baseball world. To create the model I used the ‘caret’ package from R and created a cross-validated RandomForest Model with 10 folds and because my model has 7 variables, it tested on mtry 2, 4, and 7. The RMSE of the best model was 9.68, which is an improvement from the naïve average xwOBAcon value RMSE (10.10) that I compared it against to validate model improvement. This model was able to make sense of the data while also improving predictions on performance. Using this model, we are able to start getting insights into the data that can help hitters improve their swings.
Using skills from my work in other projects I had created for the George Mason Patriots Baseball team and person projects and based on the work of Mason McRae with William & Mary Baseball, I decided to create an RShiny App to display the results of my model to the world. This app was created with the players, coaches, and baseball analysts all in mind. I started with predictions of performance and easily readable, colored scales for the beginner that might not know a lot about what the numbers mean. They also include two tools for coaches, the graphs in the middle that indicate performance based on the inputs and then change in that single variable, bat speed or attack angle. 
 
These tools will help coaches and analysts visualize the possible increase or decrease in potential as certain metrics change, helping to guide training for each player personally. The last visual that I have hidden in a tab in the sidebar of the app is a kernal density plot of all predictions in the dataset with a line overlayed on the plot indicating where that prediction would fall in the sample of players in our data. By providing this model to the public, I hope to help push forward the public sphere in understanding the more technical aspects of the baseball swing.


Discussion:
Based on my objective analysis, there are a few sure conclusions to be drawn. The first is that bat speed really is one of the most reliable and straightforward components of what makes a swing productive on the baseball field. As supposed, higher bat speed predicts better outcomes, but only to a certain extent. At about the 74mph point with standard attack angle (5-10 degrees), we see that the predictions start to level out and there is little return in predicted value past this point. This was surprising to me, as many players struggle to get over 74mph bat speed we have limited anecdotal data but the common discourse on bat speed right now is often ‘the more the better’ where I think something to be aware of is the sacrifices players may be making to get to 76 or 78 mph, and the sacrifices of bat control or ability to see the pitch might suffer. 
 
Another interesting discovery was that for most values of bat speed, attack angle is optimized right around 8 degrees, which is just higher than the average angle of the incoming pitches in this dataset (6.6 degrees). This validates Ted Williams’ approach of swinging slightly up on the ball. According to Ted in The Science of Hitting, this “puts the bat flush in line with the path of the ball for a longer period”, maximizing your chance of contact and allows the hitter to drive the ball in the air and produce “the most important hit in baseball – the home run” (Williams, 1970). Whether or not these are the exact reasons, we can now confidently say that Ted was correct, and a slightly uphill swing maximizes batted ball potential. While these may be small steps, I am satisfied that I found some signal in my model, and I encourage others to challenge my findings and analysis and help us all learn more about the baseball swing.
This analysis, based on a limited dataset of swings from elite players, should not be seen as definitive. The model’s predictive power over a naïve average xwOBAcon is marginal, and the RShiny app reveals unique hitter traits that can significantly impact swing performance but when optimizing a hitter’s swing, consider factors like health, age, and physical limitations. These findings should guide training direction, but not dictate it, and never at the expense of player health. 
This capstone project has laid the groundwork for a deeper understanding of baseball swings, yet there are countless opportunities for improvement and exploration. In this dataset alone there were over 100 possible variables that were not accounted for in my model, not to mention collecting more data on different groups of players, including beginners and lower level amateurs. MLB players make up less than 1% of the baseball playing population in the world and I would love to see this analysis for younger players, opening our eyes to understanding youth baseball training a bit better. There is also lots of opportunity to provide value to MLB clubs through injury prevention analysis with this type of objective and accurate biomechanical data. The future of baseball swing analysis is ripe with potential, and we look forward to the advancements that will undoubtedly emerge from further exploration.


Works Cited:

Baseball, D. (2024, February 26). About Us. Driveline Baseball. https://www.drivelinebaseball.com/about/ 
Expected weighted on-base average (xwOBA): Glossary. MLB.com. (n.d.). https://www.mlb.com/glossary/statcast/expected-woba 
Gregg, A. (1941). The furtherance of medical research. Yale University Press. 
McRae, M. (2023, June 10). Building a post-game pitching report in shiny R using Trackman data. Medium. https://masonmcrae.medium.com/building-a-post-game-pitching-report-in-shiny-r-using-trackman-data-e9c25823e477 
Petriello, M. (2023, February 8). What you need to know about statcast bat tracking. MLB.com. https://www.mlb.com/news/what-you-need-to-know-about-statcast-bat-tracking 
Salorio, A. (2023, September 29). Examining the future of hitting: Bat speed, swing path, and Biomechanics. Medium. https://medium.com/@adamsalorio/examining-the-future-of-hitting-bat-speed-swing-path-and-biomechanics-913efda9717f 
Sharpe, S. (2019, September 24). An introduction to expected weighted on-base average (xwOBA). Medium. https://technology.mlblogs.com/an-introduction-to-expected-weighted-on-base-average-xwoba-29d6070ba52b 
Slowinski, P. (n.d.). Woba. Sabermetrics Library. https://library.fangraphs.com/offense/woba/ 
Wasserberger KW, Brady AC, Besky DM, Jones BR, Boddy KJ. The OpenBiomechanics Project: The open source initiative for anonymized, elite-level athletic motion capture data. (2022).
